# Drafting a Website
## with Ruby, Rack and Sinatra

These instructions are meant for Snow Leopard only, Leopard users
have an outdated version of Ruby.

### Gems are like tiny pieces of software. Let's steal a few.

1. Open Terminal
   Do this with Spotlight or find Terminal in Applications > Utilities

2. Update your Ruby with `sudo gem update --system`
   Terminal will ask for your password. Note that although you'll type it in, 
   no characters will appear.
   
3. Type `sudo gem install bundler`

### The Right Tools

Dreamweaver *sux*, really. Instead, get TextMate from http://macromates.com.
Download it, move it to your Applications folder and onto your Dock.          
Open it, and dismiss the Trial window for now.
Then click `TextMate > Preferences`. Then `Advanced` and check `Save files when focus is lost`.

### Get Started

1. Download this package (there's a download link up top, it reads "Download Source"). 

2. Unzip it with the Finder. Rename the folder to your site's name, like "coolsite.com".

3. In **Terminal**, type `cd` and then a space. Drag your folder into Terminal and press enter/return. 

4. Now type `bundle install`, and press enter.
   This installs the rest of your gems.

4. Finally, type `shotgun` and press enter.0
   Your site will startup, you can view it by visiting `http://localhost:9393/` in your browser.     

### Get Working

* Drag your site folder onto TextMate's icon. It will open.
  Your "pages" are found in the `views` folder. The `public` folder is for your images, stylesheets (css), and javascript.
   
* The biggest thing to remember is "DRY", or Don't Repeat Yourself. Typing in extra code is boring –&nbsp; you could 
  be eating lunch instead! Unlike traditional plain HTML sites, your footer/header/navigation/etc. are in separate files,
  so you only update them once. Your `routes.rb` file tells your site how to behave. 

1. Open routes.rb. Let's say we're making a contact page with a web form. 
   Our routes are defined with HTTP "methods", like GET. GET is what it sounds like, it's *getting* a page
   to display.

2. Create a new route by copy/pasting the following:       
    
        get '/contact' do
          "Hello World"
        end  
   
   Now type `http://localhost:9393/contact` into your browser. You'll see "Hello World".
   That's cool and all, but you don't just want blank text.

3. Create your first "view". A "view" contains the content for your site.
   Make a new file in the `views` folder called `contact.haml`.
   *Haml is like shortened designer-friendly HTML*
   
       
         %h1 Contact Me
         %form{:action => "/contact", :method => "post"}
           %input{:type => "text", :name => "name", :placeholder => "Your Name"}
           %input{:type => "text", :name => "subject", :placeholder => "Subject"}
           %textarea{:name => "message"}
             Type your message...
           %inout{:type => "submit", :value => "Send Message"}

4. Back in `routes.rb`, remove "Hello World" and replace it with `haml :contact`
   Now, reload your browser (`http://localhost:9393/contact`). You'll see our 
   contact form, **and** the header and footer.

5. We can even make the contact page work. Again in `routes.rb`, add the following:

         post '/contact' do
           Pony.mail :to => "Your Name <yourEmailAddress@example.com>",
                     :from => params[:name] + "<no-replies@yoursitename.com>",
                     :subject => params[:subject],
                     :body => params[:message],
         
           redirect "/"
         end                                   
       
   Remember to fill in the to/from information with valid e-mails and addresses.
   
Voila! You just made a page and an action on your new site. 
         





